FRC-0087: On-chain Deal Aggregation (#879)
filecoin-project/FIPs: FRCs/frc-xxxx.md

---
fip: "0087" 
title: "On-chain Deal Aggregation"
author: "@aashidham, @raulk, @nonsense, @honghao"
discussions-to: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/866
status: Draft
type: FRC
created: 2023-10-07
---

> # FVM-Enabled Deal Aggregation

Reviewer: This title doesn't match the title metadata. Please make them consistent, and also with the title listed in the README

---
fip: "**TODO**" 
title: "FVM-Enabled Deal Aggregation"
author: "@aashidham, @raulk, @nonsense, @honghao"
discussions-to: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/866
status: Draft
type: FRC
created: 2023-10-07
---

# FVM-Enabled Deal Aggregation

## Simple Summary 

> Filecoin deal-making flows for small files previously required trusted offchain aggregators to consolidate small files into a storage deal with a Filecoin Storage Provider. This FRC proposes a robust standard for an FEVM smart contract to act abstractly as an aggregator, enabing use cases for trustless aggregation, storage of small files on Filecoin, and composibility with other onchain data organiations on FEVM (including dapps and DataDAOs).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Filecoin deal-making flows for small files previously required trusted offchain aggregators to consolidate small files into a storage deal with a Filecoin Storage Provider. This FRC proposes a robust standard for an FEVM smart contract to act abstractly as an aggregator, enabling use cases for trustless aggregation, storage of small files on Filecoin, and composability with other onchain data organiations on FEVM (including dapps and DataDAOs).
```

Reviewer 3: Fixed in new PR

> Filecoin deal-making flows for small files previously required trusted offchain aggregators to consolidate small files into a storage deal with a Filecoin Storage Provider. This FRC proposes a robust standard for an FEVM smart contract to act abstractly as an aggregator, enabing use cases for trustless aggregation, storage of small files on Filecoin, and composibility with other onchain data organiations on FEVM (including dapps and DataDAOs).

Reviewer 2: Correct me if I'm wrong, but this FRC doesn't remove the requirement that small data files be aggregated by third-parties in order to be enabled in a storage deal, yes? This FRC puts forth a standard for doing so, but doesn't affect the need, correct? 

If so, we need to amend the simple summary.

Reviewer 3: that's correct. which part of the summary do you find confusing?

## Introduction

> This proposal presents the `I*DataAggregator` set of interfaces for the Filecoin Virtual Machine (FVM) along with its reference implementation. This family of interfaces manages storage deal creation requests and (optionally) stores relevant deal metadata, including `deal_id` and`provider_id`. 

Reviewer 2: Is the standard to write "FEVM" or "FVM"? The author uses 'FEVM' in the summary and 'FVM' here.  Please standardize.

Reviewer 3: Thanks, perhaps we should use FVM for all places in this FIP? @aashidham

Reviewer 3: Fixed in new PR

> These also ensures data inclusion through PoDSI inclusion proof verification. PoDSI is described in [FRC-58 Verifiable Data Aggregation](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/e913fea0f32cf412474f48600f29dbe9753b3d0c/FRCs/frc-0058.md), which allows aggregators to produce an Proof of Data Segment Inclusion (PoDSI) certifying that the client’s data is being accurately aggregated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These also ensures data inclusion through Proof of Data Segment Inclusion (PoDSI) proof verification. PoDSI proofs are described in [FRC-58 Verifiable Data Aggregation](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/e913fea0f32cf412474f48600f29dbe9753b3d0c/FRCs/frc-0058.md) and allow aggregators to certify that the client’s data has been accurately aggregated.
```

Reviewer 3: Fixed in new PR

> This proposal additionally supports Renew/Replication/Repair-as-a-Service (RaaS) full interface, where clients can specify flexible RaaS term deals with aggregator to define the renew period, replication factor, and repair threshold. Aggregator would then honor the provided deal terms with associated Storage providers, and perform the callback/emit event when the job is completed. More details on aggregator-implemented RaaS full interface workflow can be found [here](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/11wurlsTFo7ojtDI3UKzU1JA9Ploy3-VduuJ5dJciW80/edit#slide=id.g253ed1e380a_1_122).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This proposal additionally supports Renew/Replication/Repair-as-a-Service (RaaS) full interface, where clients can specify flexible RaaS term deals with aggregators. An aggregator would then honor the provided deal terms with associated storage providers and perform the callback/emit event when the job is completed. More details on the aggregator-implemented RaaS full interface workflow can be found [here](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/11wurlsTFo7ojtDI3UKzU1JA9Ploy3-VduuJ5dJciW80/edit#slide=id.g253ed1e380a_1_122).
```

Reviewer 3: Fixed in new PR

> Standardizing these interfaces allows various aggregators to offer a set of uniform methods for submitting storage deal creation requests and storing the deal metadata. This enhances community portability across different aggregators and promotes compatibility among tools and libraries. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Standardizing these interfaces allows various aggregators to offer a set of uniform methods for submitting storage deal creation requests and storing the deal metadata. This enhances community portability across different aggregators and promotes compatibility amongst tools and libraries. 
```

Reviewer 3: Fixed in new PR

> Note that this FRC can be built on both FVM mainnet as well as IPC subnets. The latter can be more gas efficient, but may not feature the variety of SPs available on SP mainnet. Over time, we expect that gas costs may push more SPs and builders for this standard to IPC subnets. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that this FRC can be built on both FVM mainnet as well as IPC subnets. The latter can be more gas efficient, but may not feature the variety of SPs available on SP mainnet. Over time, we expect that gas costs may push more SPs and builders implementing this standard to do so on IPC subnets. 
```

Reviewer 3: Fixed in new PR

> Note that currently this FRC does not cover paid deals, as well as managing escrow for paid deals. However we expect that future versions of this FRC may incorporate these flows.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that currently this FRC does not currently describe a standard aggregation workflow for paid deals and/or paid deal escrow. 
```

Reviewer 3: Updated in new PR

## Motivation / Context

This standard makes it possible for a client to transact with an aggregator in a trustless manner. That is, the user can be sure that the aggregated file contains the submitted subpiece through PoDSI (in the case of aggregators that implement `IOffchainDataAggregator`) or through commPa computation happening onchain (in the case of aggregators that implement `IOnchainDataAggregator`). Through this trustless aggregation, this standard also enables richer interactions with Dapps, DataDAOs, and other onchain organizations present on FVM or IPC subnets. These can now store small pieces of data through FVM / IPC.

> The main audience of this standard is aggregators running in the PLN that want to leverage onchain primitives to trustlessly aggregate data. They should leverage this approach when they want to make their operations transparent to clients, SPs and other onchain indexers. They should also leverage this standard when they want to make their aggregation composable with other data organizations (such as Dapps and DataDAOs) being built on FVM / IPC. We expect substantial adoption of this standard across these aggregators. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The main audience of this standard is aggregators that want to leverage onchain primitives to trustlessly aggregate data. They should leverage this approach when they want to make their operations transparent to clients, SPs and other onchain indexers. They should also leverage this standard when they want to make their aggregation composable with other data organizations (such as Dapps and DataDAOs) being built on FVM / IPC. We expect substantial adoption of this standard across these aggregators. 
```

Reviewer 3: Updated in new PR

## **Specification**

### `IOffchainDataAggregator` **Interface**

Outlined below is the `IOffchainDataAggregator` interface, which has to be implemented by each smart contract that stores aggregators’ deal information. Each aggregator can deploy their own smart contract to have full control, or multiple aggregators can share one smart contract and put their data under the same one. 

```solidity
// SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
pragma solidity ^0.8.17;

/**
 * @title IOffchainDataAggregator Interface
 * @notice Interface for an aggregator oracle on the Filecoin Virtual Machine (FVM)
 */
interface IOffchainDataAggregator {
    
    /**
     * @notice A structure referensing a deal representation in the Filecoin network
     */
    struct Deal {
        uint64 dealId;   // A unique identifier for the deal.

>         uint64 providerId;  // The storage provider that is storing the data for the deal.
> 				uint64 marketActorId; // The actor ID of the storage market in which the deal representation is stored. dealId is scoped by marketActorId

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
        uint64 providerId;  // The storage provider that is storing the data for the deal.
        uint64 marketActorId; // The actor ID of the storage market in which the deal representation is stored. dealId is scoped by marketActorId
```

Reviewer 3: Fixed in new PR

    }

    /**
     * @notice Emitted when a new request is submitted with an ID and content identifier (CID)
     * @param id Identifier for the request
     * @param cid Content identifier for the request
     */
    event SubmitAggregatorRequest(uint256 indexed id, bytes cid);

    /**
     * @notice Emitted when a new request is submitted with an ID, content identifier (CID), and RaaS parameters
     * @param id Identifier for the request
     * @param cid Content identifier for the request
     * @param _replication_target The number of copies this file should be replicated to
     * @param _repair_threshold The number of epochs the deal should be repaired after being inactive for
     * @param _renew_threshold The number of epochs the deal should be renewed before its expiration date
     */

>     event SubmitAggregatorRequestWithRaaS(uint256 indexed id, bytes cid,
> 																					uint256 _replication_target, uint256 _repair_threshold,
> 																					uint256 _renew_threshold);

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    event SubmitAggregatorRequestWithRaaS(uint256 indexed id, bytes cid, uint256 _replication_target, uint256 _repair_threshold, uint256 _renew_threshold);
```

Reviewer 3: Fixed here https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/pull/879/commits/522c60716af93a1972e94bd0c24b75347f3cac61

Reviewer 4: @honghaoq doesn't seem to be fixed yet, it's fixed in `IOnchainDataAggregator` but not `IOffchainDataAggregator`

Reviewer 3: Done https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/pull/879/commits/1d850a235730a38eaebbd80dbf478f93f12b3de5 Good catch:)

    /**
     * @notice Emitted when a request is completed, marking it with the request ID and deal ID
     * @param id Identifier for the request
     * @param dealId Identifier for the deal associated with the request
     */
    event CompleteAggregatorRequest(uint256 indexed id, uint64 indexed dealId);

    /**
     * @notice Function to submit a new file (as denominated by a piece CID) to the aggregator
     * @param _cid The piece CID to be stored
     * @param _fetchLink A link to he piece CID to allow the aggregators to fetch the data in the piece CID.
     * @return The identifier for the submitted request
     */
    function submit(bytes memory _cid, bytes memory _fetchLink) external returns (uint256);

> 		/**
>      * @notice Function to submit a new file to the aggregator, specifing the raas parameters

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    /**
     * @notice Function to submit a new file to the aggregator, specifing the raas parameters
```

Reviewer 3: Fixed in new PR

     * @param _cid The piece CID of the file to be stored
     * @param _replication_target The number of copies this file should be replicated to
     * @param _repair_threshold The number of epochs the deal should be repaired after being inactive for
     * @param _renew_threshold The number of epochs the deal should be renewed before its expiration date
     * @return 

>      */
> 		function submitRaaS(bytes memory _cid, bytes memory _fetchLink,
> 												 uint256 memory _replication_target, uint256 memory _repair_threshold,
> 									       uint256 memory _renew_threshold);

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
     */
	function submitRaaS(bytes memory _cid, bytes memory _fetchLink, uint256 memory _replication_target, uint256 memory _repair_threshold, uint256 memory _renew_threshold);
```

Reviewer 3: Fixed in new PR

    /**
     * @notice Callback function that is called by the aggregator once data has been stored
     * @param _id The identifier for the request
     * @param _dealId The deal's unique identifier
     * @param _providerId The provider's unique identifier
     * @param _proof Inclusion proof for the stored data segment
     * @param _verifierData Additional data needed to verify the inclusion proof
     * @return Additional auxiliary data
     */
    function complete(

>         uint256 _id,
> 				uint64 _marketActorId,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
        uint256 _id,
        uint64 _marketActorId,
```

Reviewer 3: Fixed in new PR

        uint64 _dealId,
        uint64 _providerId,
        InclusionProof memory _proof,
        InclusionVerifierData memory _verifierData
    ) external returns (InclusionAuxData memory);
}
```

Aggregators who want to provide RaaS features should implement the `submitRaaS` and monitor the `SubmitAggregatorRequestWithRaaS` as well. Aggregators should take the RaaS parameters in the `SubmitAggregatorRequestWithRaaS` and register the corresponding RaaS functions for the deal. 

`InclusionProof` , `InclusionVerifierData`, and `InclusionAuxData` are defined as follows (all the code related to verifying the PoDSI is provided in the reference implementation) 

```solidity
// ProofData is a Merkle proof
struct ProofData {
    uint64 index;

>     bytes32[] path;

Reviewer 4: Is it a concern at all that this could be a _very_ large value where aggregating very small pieces into very large deals? How does that impact gas or consumption of the `complete()` even when using the on-chain form of this (asking from a position of relative naivety about how this gets used in practice)?

Reviewer 3: The idea is not to store proof onchain, proof is verfied at complete callback and we recommend aggregators to store it in offchain db with associated endpoint for client to access proof offchain as needed. If aggregator wants to do this onchain, we generally recommend doing it on L2 (IPC) to save cost

    bytes commPa;
    // SizePa is padded size of aggregator's deal
    uint64 sizePa;
}
```

### `IOnchainDataAggregator` **Interface**

For building **onchain** **aggregators** (aggregators that compute CommPa within smart contract onchain) , the user interface is very similar. The only difference is the `complete()` callback function that aggregator calls: since the CommP aggregation happens within the onchain contract, PoDSI is entirely optional and thus the above fields (`InclusionProof` , `InclusionVerifierData`, and `InclusionAuxData`) are not required. 

In this case, the function `onchain_complete` would only needs to include `uint256 _id`, `uint64 _marketActorIduint64 _dealId`, and `uint64 _providerId` fields, as shown below:

```solidity
// SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
pragma solidity ^0.8.17;

/**
 * @title IOnchainDataAggregator Interface
 * @notice Interface for an aggregator oracle on the Filecoin Virtual Machine (FVM)
 */
interface IOnchainDataAggregator {
    
    /**
     * @notice A structure referencing a deal representation in the Filecoin network
     */
    struct Deal {
        uint64 dealId;   // A unique identifier for the deal.

>         uint64 providerId;  // The storage provider that is storing the data for the deal.
> 				uint64 marketActorId; // The actor ID of the storage market in which the deal representation is stored. dealId is scoped by marketActorId

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
        uint64 providerId;  // The storage provider that is storing the data for the deal.
        uint64 marketActorId; // The actor ID of the storage market in which the deal representation is stored. dealId is scoped by marketActorId
```

Reviewer 3: Fixed in new PR

    }

    /**
     * @notice Emitted when a new request is submitted with an ID and content identifier (CID)
     * @param id Identifier for the request
     * @param cid Content identifier for the request
     */
    event SubmitAggregatorRequest(uint256 indexed id, bytes cid);

    /**
     * @notice Emitted when a new request is submitted with an ID, content identifier (CID), and RaaS parameters
     * @param id Identifier for the request
     * @param cid Content identifier for the request
     * @param _replication_target The number of copies this file should be replicated to
     * @param _repair_threshold The number of epochs the deal should be repaired after being inactive for
     * @param _renew_threshold The number of epochs the deal should be renewed before its expiration date
     */

>     event SubmitAggregatorRequestWithRaaS(uint256 indexed id, bytes cid,
> 																					uint256 _replication_target, uint256 _repair_threshold,
> 																					uint256 _renew_threshold);
> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    event SubmitAggregatorRequestWithRaaS(uint256 indexed id, bytes cid, uint256 _replication_target, uint256 _repair_threshold, uint256 _renew_threshold);

```

Reviewer 3: Fixed in new PR

    /**
     * @notice Emitted when a request is completed, marking it with the request ID and deal ID
     * @param id Identifier for the request
     * @param dealId Identifier for the deal associated with the request
     */
    event CompleteAggregatorRequest(uint256 indexed id, uint64 indexed dealId);

    /**
     * @notice Function to submit a new file to the aggregator
     * @param _cid The piece CID of the file to be stored
     * @return The identifier for the submitted request
     */
    function submit(bytes memory _cid, bytes memory _fetchLink) external returns (uint256);

> 		/**
>      * @notice Function to submit a new file to the aggregator, specifing the raas parameters

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    /**
     * @notice Function to submit a new file to the aggregator, specifing the raas parameters
```

Reviewer 3: Fixed in new PR

     * @param _cid The piece CID of the file to be stored
     * @param _replication_target The number of copies this file should be replicated to
     * @param _repair_threshold The number of epochs the deal should be repaired after being inactive for
     * @param _renew_threshold The number of epochs the deal should be renewed before its expiration date
     * @return 
     */

> 		function submitRaaS(bytes memory _cid, bytes memory _fetchLink,
> 												 uint256 memory _replication_target, uint256 memory _repair_threshold,
> 									       uint256 memory _renew_threshold);
> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
		function submitRaaS(bytes memory _cid, bytes memory _fetchLink, uint256 memory _replication_target, uint256 memory _repair_threshold, uint256 memory _renew_threshold);

```

Reviewer 3: Fixed in new PR

    /**
     * @notice Callback function that is called by the onchain aggregator once data has been stored
     * @param _id The identifier for the request
     * @param _dealId The deal's unique identifier
     * @param _providerId The provider's unique identifier
     */
    function onchain_complete(

>         uint256 _id,
> 				uint64 _marketActorId,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
        uint256 _id,
        uint64 _marketActorId,
```

Reviewer 3: Fixed in new PR

![Untitled](https://github.com/aashidham/FIPs/assets/782153/043e0a39-97e2-4b23-8dcc-ed95be857f79)

### **Backwards Compatibility**

This proposal introduces a new standard and does not alter or disrupt existing interfaces or implementations. However, aggregators wishing to conform to this standard will need to adopt this interface.

### **Test Cases**

Testing for the implementation of the `I*DataAggregator` family of interfaces should focus on:

- Successful data submission and completion.
- Correct PoDSI proof.
- Accurate tracking of CIDs and deals’ metadata.
- Proper event emissions during submission and completion of the aggregator request.

### Data Retrieval

Aggregators maintain a copy of the data and serve it via an HTTP endpoint. Aggregators should provide an HTTP endpoint and a IPFS endpoint for users to retrieve the data for a certain period, e.g. 30 days. Client can make an HTTP call to the aggregator they uploaded the data to to download the file by providing the data’s CID. 

Recommended API interface for the two retrieval methods mentioned above:

- Retrieval endpoint for Filecoin retrieval: GET /data/<pieceCID>

> - Retrieval gateway for IPFS retrieval: https://gateway/ipfs/<pieceCID>

Reviewer 4: I think this is using the client's piece CID here, rather than the aggregated piece CID, correct? I like the use of `commPc` above to differentiate from `commPa`, perhaps that could be used here to disambiguate what this is referring to? They look very close to existing boost retrieval endpoints, with `/piece/` instead of `/data/` today, but those are for stored deal pieces, of `commPa` (I don't _think_ we do anything fancy with `/piece/` retrievals on PoDSI deals today yet anyway).

Reviewer 3: Yes this is referring to client piece CID. We had a call with Will to align on these, so that it is consistent with the piece retrieval gateway FRC https://github.com/willscott/FIPs/blob/3c073e89d5c2df1b24742af748c4fbacb4e06846/FRCs/piece-gateway.md. 

Note that this PR is not updated (@aashidham will be updating it soon), you can see the latest draft for retrieval section here https://github.com/willscott/FIPs/blob/3c073e89d5c2df1b24742af748c4fbacb4e06846/FRCs/piece-gateway.md

Reviewer 3: Fixed in new PR
